>> Extraordinary claims
require extraordinary evidence.
Last year, Gaia documented
several humanoid mummies
discovered in the
Nazca region of Peru.
DNA samples were extracted
from the body, feet, and hands
of the mummy named Maria.
The DNA was tested to determine
if it matched any known DNA.
The results are in.
>> We are dealing with
an unidentified organism.
>> In my career, I can't say
I've actually seen anything
like this.
>> It will be difficult to
imagine how someone 1,000 years
ago could have mastermind
such an elaborate hoax.
>> Hi.
I'm Melissa Tittl, one
of the producers at Gaia
who went down to Peru in 2017
to document the first discovery
of several mummies.
For the past year, our team has
been reporting on these bodies,
and today we have some
results regarding Maria
and another body named Wawita.
Let's recap what we have
discovered thus far.
We took samples from four
areas in the body, the fingers,
the toes, the lower region of
the pelvis, and under the arm.
The CAT scans and
X-rays revealed
that Maria seemed
to have what looked
like a complete human
skeletal composition.
Carbon dating we
commissioned suggested
that she was somewhere
around 1,700 years old.
We also tested the white
powder that covered her body,
and this test revealed it
was diatomaceous earth.
In the same area, a
baby named Wawita.
The carbon dating suggested
this body was 670 years old
but looks similar.
With all of this
information, we decided
to get DNA tests to
get more clarity,
and after being denied by
various experts in universities
in America, we sent the
samples to various labs
in other countries, and the
experts of the Russian Academy
of Sciences at St. Petersburg
University delivered
the first results.
After many months of
waiting for DNA sequencing,
our report was
generated by the team
and this is what it revealed
about Wawita and Maria.
>> The sequencing process
itself is run on a device called
the Genome Sequencer.
In our case, we
use two sequences,
one for the primary
analysis, MiSeq sequencer,
and HiSeq sequencer for
comparative analysis
of the genomic DNA.
A great amount of data is
generated after sequencing.
This data is generated
in the machine.
After this data
has been generated,
they are transferred
to a computer,
and then our colleague,
Alexi, a bioinformatician,
used them to analyze the data.
And then we process the
deciphered sequence.
We remove, in the first
place, various impurities,
and after that, we compare it
with an available sequence.
He found out that there were
actually ancient samples
and we could yield the
ancient DNA, and we have it.
The fact that this
ancient DNA has
a lot of variations that are
alternative to the standard
genome is quite interesting.
In other words, it tells
us that we actually
have unique and new data, so we
have not added anything to it.
>> When we were in process
of genetic analysis,
up to the very end it was
unclear would it be possible
to make some conclusions or not.
So the most important
finding from our DNA analysis
at the moment was that
in population analysis,
it was absolutely clear that
the DNA of both Maria and Wawita
doesn't belong to any
of modern human DNA.
That's the most important.
Second important
component, that they
belong to the same type
of humans or species.
It's second conclusion.
And third conclusion is
that they are not relatives.
They are not mother
and daughter,
but they are different.
>> So what does
this mean exactly?
According to the
report, it suggests
that out of the
DNA samples taken
from several areas
of the body, they
were able to get 25.6%
of Wawita, 23.8% of Maria
to read as human-like DNA.
That 23%, 25% of
readable DNA, none of it
was matched to modern human DNA.
>> My name is William Brown
and my official position,
a research scientist
and biophysicist.
I'm trained, though,
in my academic career--
10 years at the university--
in cellular molecular biology.
I've got a master's in applied
recombinant DNA technology
from New York University.
I've done extensive
DNA analysis results
which have been published
in peer reviewed journals.
However, I'm only analyzing
or interpreting the data
as presented in the report.
I would say that the beings from
which the samples were taken,
from which the DNA
was analyzed, are not
of any known terrestrial origin.
They don't appear to match
any species on Earth.
I first saw the Nazca mummies--
most likely it's fake,
that was what I thought.
Although that was my initial
reaction to seeing it,
when I saw CT scans,
imaging of the bone
underneath by individuals
who are trained
in this kind of
practice, this kind
of study-- so of the
DNA that was isolated,
only 25% of the total
matched any known human gene.
This is pretty rigorous because
there's like the 1,000 Human
Genome Project where they
have done whole genome
sequencing of over
2,000 individuals
from every continent
on Earth and compiled
kind of like a average
human reference genome.
And so you take these sequences
isolated from the sample
with this being and you
go and you compare them
to that human
reference genome data.
That's astounding.
>> You may be curious like we
are as to why does this data
seem so different than some
of the other data out there.
Well, as complex as DNA
is, the more complexity
lies in the question asked
by the scientists doing
the sequencing.
Meaning, once you figure
out your question,
you spend months or
even years trying
to figure out that one answer.
In this case, the question
our team asked was,
could this DNA match
any modern human DNA?
Our answer came out as, no.
In another lab they might
ask a different question
of the similar sample.
All of these questions lead to
answers in the same direction.
We verify this approach with
a professor of biotechnology
at the University of Harrisburg.
>> I'm Dr. Doug Taylor.
I'm a professor of biotechnology
here at Harrisburg University.
My background is I have a PhD
in biochemistry and molecular
biology.
When you think about any
parameters associated with
or methodologies
for sequencing DNA,
how is it different from
one place versus another?
>> I thought that there just
was a set DNA sequencing process
across every country,
across every lab,
but you're saying
that's not the case.
If you could explain DNA
sequencing differences
in other countries.
>> Start with DNA
sequencing, it's a evolving.
What is the question
you're trying to ask?
That'll determine how do
I go about isolating this,
and it can vary from lab to
lab or country to country.
But also comes to
the next question
is, what am I trying to answer?
And what specific
population of DNA
am I trying to look
at where I think is
going to give me that answer?
And that may
determine, OK, well,
I need to put in this
intermediate step which
is going to enhance
that population of DNA,
which is going to make
it more likely I'm
going to get an answer.
>> But how was this
report created?
And more importantly,
what kind of process
did they use to analyze the DNA?
>>DNA extraction, no matter
what laboratory does it,
is very similar.
You want to take the sample,
you want to crush it,
you want to crush it into
as many small particles as
possible so we have
all the DNA particles
and cellular components
floating around
in some type of solution.
You then isolate the DNA from
the rest of the solution,
so then you have
your purified DNA.
At our laboratory at
Lakehead University,
we take that DNA extract and we
focus on very small fragments
of DNA, whereas Next-Generation
Sequencing, what
was written in the report is
they target all different types
of DNA on a much larger
scale and then they
make some kind of comparison and
draw conclusions based on that.
>> The DNA extraction process
is similar to the one of modern
people, but at the final stage,
we added a magnetic particle
separation technique to the
standard method just to remove
the contamination that
occurred during mummification.
We repeated the DNA
extraction seven times,
and every time we
improved the method
and improved the
protection of this method
against any contamination
that could be brought in,
even by a laboratory researcher.
At every stage, we believe
we got a much higher quality
sample.
>> Next-Gen Sequencing is now
the Cadillac of how you do
sequencing, where you're
sequencing not the entire
genome or the entire chromosome
but fragments that are derived
from it.
And that isn't so simple to do,
especially if you go back now
and want to compare
it to a reference.
Unless my reference is
exactly like the person
that I'm looking at, then
it may not match that well.
>> But what about the
possibilities of contamination?
You are probably wondering
about the other 75%.
And according to the
report, the other 75%
could be anything from
bacteria to unknown influences
or any life forms we didn't
run tests against yet.
>> So we have some results now.
It's very exciting
for all of us,
but still it's not
the final result
because of the
first question, how
this DNA of Maria and
Wawita are related
to ancient DNA of
Peruvian people.
That's a very
important question.
And at the moment, we were
unable to answer this question
because we didn't
have a database
of ancient Peruvian people.
And then, we'll make next
population analysis comparing
the DNA of Wawita and Maria
with ancient DNA of Peruvians,
and then we'll see how they
match together or don't match.
>> One of the reasons that
you might see only 25% is
because your hominid being that
you recovered is not related
to humans at all or any
known terrestrial species.
The other possibility
is that there
was, for instance, a high degree
of bacterial contamination
during the processing.
This is not the fault
of the individuals doing
the extraction of the
material, the individuals doing
the isolation and amplification
and sequencing of the material.
Bacterial contamination
is a widespread problem
and all Next-Generation
Sequencing technologies,
it's partly because
life is everywhere.
You're looking at the foundation
of life, this information code,
you get inputs from different
sources that you don't want.
>> Even in the
best circumstances,
when you start with ideal
situations where you had
everything done perfectly--
the DNA was isolated
fresh, you had
the appropriate
protective agents
to protect the DNA from
degradation-- you're still
not going to get 100% match.
>> What does it
mean, contamination?
It was ancient contamination
with ancient bacteria,
so it was defined and taken out.
But they were excavated, people
brought them in their hands,
even in gloves, but
people were breathing,
people were carrying it around.
It would be strange would there
be no modern contamination.
Then, it would
have been strange.
So as we have it, it's normal.
>> The DNA results would not at
all support the idea that these
were human remains
that were altered.
There's no support to
conclude that it's a hoax.
Individuals who are not
basing that off of data,
they're basing that off of
their opinion and perspective.
Now, based on my
opinion and perspective,
which I feel is
informed by the data,
I see strong
indications suggest it's
an authentic anomalous
remains of unknown origin.
>> What does this mean for
our ongoing investigation?
Scientific data analysis
from this report
shows us that the DNA
gathered from Maria and Wawita
does not match any
modern human DNA.
As with most questions, it
reveals another question,
and we welcome
independent reporters
to explore further as we are.
Will further testing
reveal a subspecies,
DNA that is still unmatchable
to any species known?
Or will it just bring
up more questions?
Our scientists have some final
thoughts on the current report
and the ongoing investigation.
>> As a conclusion, I would
say that it took us practically
a year to make this
whole analysis,
and it's not finished yet.
So we're still in the process,
but it is absolutely clear
that we are facing with
a very exciting situation
because all data
that we have tells us
that it's not human-like.
It's not just a simple
mutation, but it's
another type of human species.
We don't know whether it
was some line of humans
with elongated
skulls who was living
on the earth for
maybe millenniums.
I'm sure that it will open up
a new page of human history
and a new page of
civilization history.
>> This report says to me
that the remains of the Nazca
mummies are, at this
time, of unknown origin.
It's a wow.
It's extremely surprising.
>> Well, my final thoughts
are this is an incredibly
interesting find and it really
needs to be looked into.
And I think it is kind
of an exciting time
that different groups can
apply different expertise.
We're no longer these
individual groups anymore.
You have a global community.
We can bring everyone
together on the global scale
and provide different
expertise in order
to answer some of
these questions.
Is it human?
Yes or no?
But beyond that, what does
it mean for humans as a race?
>> In our next update, we
have samples in several labs
in several different countries.
We look at the
elemental analysis.
>> It is an ordinary set of
elements, except for cadmium.
We have found cadmium
chloride on the surface
of these specimens.
>> Those elements may be created
only by a highly developed
civilization.
>> And what can we learn from
a closer look at bone density?
>> It looks like some
cyst encapsulations.
She was unhealthy and old.
Here we have the main sinus.
It is circular.
In humans, it is
more box-shaped.
Frankly speaking, I have
never seen such round sinuses
on any thermogram we
have ever looked at.